Good afternoon, everyone.
We'd like to welcome you to session 101,
Open Source at Apple.
Here to begin our session,
won't you please welcome the
Director of Core OS Engineering,
Brett Halle.
Good afternoon.
Hope you've enjoyed the couple
of sessions so far today and
getting engaged in Mac OS X.
I want to spend some time this afternoon
and talk a little bit about what
we're doing with Open Source at Apple.
In particular,
we'll spend a few minutes going over
some of our key Open Source projects:
Darwin,
which you heard a lot about this morning,
but there's also sessions later today
going over some of the technical details.
Streaming Server Technology for streaming
QuickTime content over the Internet,
HeaderDoc because all that great
source actually needs to be documented,
and OpenPlay/NetSprockets for
some of our work that we've
been doing in the games arena.
And we'll talk a little bit about where
we're going with Open Source at Apple,
and most importantly,
because the whole point of
Open Source is getting involved,
how you guys can participate.
So first of all, as I just mentioned,
the whole point of Open Source is
that it's a community effort.
And we take this pretty seriously,
as you'll see in the presentation today,
in terms of how we've set up our
infrastructure and the progress
we've made over the last year,
in terms of how you can get involved
in Open Source and with Apple.
Open Source really benefits
everybody in the community.
Certainly,
we gain a lot because we're getting
a lot of really great technology
from the community at large.
You gain a lot because you
can see what we're doing,
how we're doing it, and as you'll see,
you can actually see what
we're doing in real time,
and can actually get involved in
helping us make the product better.
And obviously,
the end result of that is the customer
ends up with something that's better,
really better than the sum of the parts.
This is pretty new stuff though,
particularly for a company like
Apple to get involved in Open Source.
And we're learning moment by moment and
working with you on trying to improve.
So it's going to be kind
of exciting at times,
certainly over the past year.
We've learned an awful lot about how
to do this and how to get better at it.
But there's a lot more to go from
there and we're really looking
forward to making this successful.
You've all heard of Darwin.
Steve talked about it extensively
in the keynote this morning.
You heard it if you were at the
Mac OS X overview session this afternoon.
It is the core for Mac OS X.
And it's really important
to note that we're not doing
Open Source as a side project.
It's not this interesting little
experiment off to the side.
But the core operating system
of Mac OS X is Open Source.
It is one and the same.
And I think one important way to help
understand that it is our goal and is
our intention from the source code that
exists in the Open Source community
that you can rebuild Darwin,
the Darwin Open Source kernel,
and be able to replace the
Mac OS X core operating system kernel.
And it is the same system.
We have a little ways to
go to get there completely,
but this is where we're
headed and this is what we
technically want to make happen.
[Transcript missing]
Part of the role of the Darwin developer
is to partner with you in the
process of incorporating changes.
We really want to involve not
only our engineering team,
but the Darwin developers in the
process of being able to take the
changes that you make to the code
or suggestions that you have or bug
fixes that you have and incorporate
them back into our source tree.
These folks will be coming
up on stage a little bit,
but I'll have them wave their hand in
the air a moment and tell you a little
bit about some of the Darwin developers
we have currently signed up.
Joe Gervais is the president
of Naked Mole Rat Software,
kind of a novel company name.
I'd be interested to find out
where you came up with that.
and basically he's a small
game development house striving
to match the quarterly losses
of a large dot-com company.
This is his description here,
so I figured I'd pass that on.
Anyway, in his copious spare time,
Joe is the tech lead for OpenPlay and
the NetSprocket technology,
and he's got some great stuff
to share with us a little
later in the presentation.
In the streaming server space,
Adrian Sun, who's a developer at Cobalt,
and is actually an author of
Apple Share support for Netatalk.
Those of you who have been
involved in the BSD community
and in the Linux community
should be familiar with Netatalk.
It's an Open Source package
that lets Unix machines supply
Apple Talk print and file services.
He's been involved quite a bit in
providing various bug fixes and porting
effort to the Darwin streaming server.
Judy Tang has been driving
NT platform support.
She's a senior software engineer
at I-Beam and has actually been
responsible for making sure that we
have Darwin streaming server on NT.
In the Darwin OS community,
there's Scott Anguish.
and Scott Gawin.
Scott is an editor for Stepwise
and is also an author of a number
of Cocoa Utility applications
and examples and stuff,
things like the OpenUp utility.
John Carmack, I think everybody
should be familiar with.
I think there was all sorts of
blood splattered across the screen
this morning from his company.
But he's been actually involved not only
in bringing great games to Mac OS X,
but in working on getting X11 up
on top of the Darwin OS codebase.
Luke Howard is actually -- is Luke here?
and Luke Luke was an intern
at Apple a couple of years
ago and worked on NetInfo.
He's going to school down in Australia.
He's been involved quite heavily in
importing NetInfo to the Linux platform
and making a number of other
enhancements and bug fixes to NetInfo.
Andrew Stone has been around
in the Next community forever.
He wrote the first Next Step app
and Rhapsody application.
As I understand it,
he throws really cool parties,
so you want to make sure you get invited.
He's working on Core Foundation.
We've had a number of contributions
to the Open Source activity.
I'm not going to go in detail over this,
but we just did a small sampling of
some of the stuff that has come in
just over the past really few weeks,
a couple of weeks here.
So, this is a little bit of an
example of what we're doing.
We're working on a lot of new stuff.
We're working on a lot of new things.
We're working on a
to give people a moment to look over
some of the stuff that's been done.
I encourage you, actually,
to go to our website and get some
of the details around some of
the work that's been going on.
So we have a number of things to show,
so I'll get off the stage here
and let the real engineers tell
you about what's happening.
First will be Fred Sanchez,
who's going to talk a bit about what
we've been doing with some of the support
infrastructure for Darwin in open source,
as well as talk about what we've
been doing with Darwin itself,
the OS code.
Chris LaCroix will be coming up
and talking about streaming server
developments and activities.
Joe Jarve will be talking about
OpenPlay and NetSprocket and
has some cool stuff to show.
And Ron will be telling you a
bit about what HeaderDoc is and
how to get involved with that.
And afterwards,
we're going to have a Q&A panel,
so if you have some questions
about what we're doing with open
source and how to get involved,
save your questions.
So without further ado,
Fred Sanchez is a manager -- sorry,
a manager.
Not yet.
An engineer within the Core OS team.
He just thinks he likes to be
a manager in the Core OS team
and has been one responsible
for a lot of the great activity
that's been going on with Darwin.
Howdy, so I'm going to talk
about two things mostly.
We're going to talk a little bit
about the stuff that makes Darwin and
the other Open Source projects go,
and we're going to talk
about Darwin the OS itself.
And then at the end we're going to
have a little bit of demo stuff.
First let's talk about our source code.
We maintain all of our
source code in CVS.
That's actually all of
Mac OS X from kernel all the
way up through Carbon in Apple.
And we have a repository that
contains nearly all of the
Darwin code which is available
outside of our corporate firewall.
And you people as part of the
developer community can access
that source code at any time.
That's actually two repositories.
There's a read/write
one and a read-only one,
but they have the same data on them.
Internally at Apple,
we've got our internal developers
and they do the majority of their
development on that external repository.
So as we make changes to the
third party stuff like Apache and
whatnot or into NetInfo,
that gets checked into that repository
and is available immediately
to our developer community.
We also have actually a whole
fleet of internal CVS servers.
But for CoreOS,
we've got one that we maintain some of
the code which is not open source there.
And we also maintain a couple of
projects which are open source
but are pushed out as snapshots.
The kernel is the best example of that.
And the reason is that we've got
parts of the kernel that support
hardware that may not be announced yet.
So the Power Books that
most people have around,
you know, we had support in the kernel
there a while ahead of time in
order to get the testing done.
But we don't want to pre-announce
what all the features of
the hardware might be.
Since they're changing and, you know,
we like the surprise factor of all that.
So the kernel gets developed internally
and then periodically we push out the
kernel contents to the public repository
where we filter out the few small
things that we want to keep private.
That also includes things like drivers
which are licensed from third parties
such as the adaptex driver is kind of
the best example where we don't own
that code so we can't open source it.
But the majority of the Darwin code
lives primarily in the external server.
We also have the Darwin developers,
which Brett mentioned,
and they all have access
to the same repository.
So they either work with the
Apple teams in order to get their
code integrated and reviewed,
or they talk to us and then they commit
it themselves to the external repository.
Note that Darwin developers,
that orange bubble actually
encompasses the purple bubble.
That I as an Apple employee
and everyone who works in the
CoreOS group is a Darwin developer.
And we're all sort of part of
the same one whole large team.
As a member of the double LL community,
you can either coordinate with the
Darwin developers if you're making
changes that you'd like to see put
back into the original code base and
eventually into Mac OS X as well.
Or you could go to our website and submit
directly into a submission web form where
you could give us the URL to your code.
And we'll review that and stick
that into the source repository.
We recently added a bug tracking feature
that should be going live tonight.
You can submit bug reports through
a web form that we're working on.
Internally at Apple,
we use a bug tracking
system called Radar.
It's very pervasive to everything we do.
We manage all of our source code
changes through this Radar tool.
Whenever we're going to change something,
somebody follows a bug,
describes what we're changing,
how we changed it, why, what the risk is,
and so on.
And then before each release,
we review what things we want
to put in and roll those out.
And so one thing we're going to
do is we're going to query that
data and take out the stuff that's
relevant to Darwin and push that
out on our website as a report.
So everybody can go in and see what's
going on in the CoreOS group in
terms of what bugs we're working on,
what their state is,
who's working on them,
what's been done so far,
why it's still in
whatever state it is now.
And that's actually a very good tool,
especially if you're a third-party
developer and you've submitted
one of these bugs and you're like,
"I really wish that
we'd fixed blah." Well,
then you can actually see
what's going on there.
Darwin developers, the registered folks,
are going to have a special web
access so that they can actually
edit and review these bugs and we
can assign bugs to them and so on.
So that they can basically have
the same level of access to the
radar database that we have.
Quick summary, our website,
apple.com/darwin or
www.publicsource.apple.com,
has all the information you need
about how to get started with Darwin,
where to download it,
what resources are available.
The CVS repository is also documented
there and it's also available via
a web interface so that you don't
have to actually use the CVS tools
and check out all the source code.
You can actually just browse what's
in there using a standard web browser.
We've got a pile of mailing lists
and these are very important.
If you want to be part
of the Darwin community,
you want to become one of
these Darwin developers,
you want to contribute,
really you need to be active
on these mailing lists.
Several of the Apple engineering staff
are already subscribed to these lists and
we listen to everything that goes there.
We respond to as many of
the questions as we can.
We've got people in
the file system group,
in the kernel group,
in all sorts of parts of the Core OS that
are paying attention and actually
respond to a lot of the questions
that come out on those mailing lists.
Bug tracking is already mentioned
and you can get more information
about that on our website.
And our Darwin developers are of course
one of the best resources we have.
If you want to talk about getting
something into the system,
come to me, come to Andy, come to Dave,
whatever,
and we'll help you figure out how to get
your changes integrated into the system.
Darwin 1.0 shipped in April and
since then we've actually had
a great deal of response to it.
We've had a lot of downloads
as Brett mentioned.
We've also had a lot of people
start to submit bug fixes.
Prior to 1.0 we had a system that was
not based on the latest development
stuff that we're working on.
So a lot of people were somewhat
discouraged about working on
a kernel that we're going to
toss out most of the code to.
So now that we've got the thing that's
going to show up in Mac OS X that's
going to ship in mass volume
come summer and then in January,
that's the code that's out there now
and people are already working on it.
1.1 of Darwin is what's in DP4.
You've already got that.
You can start working
on Darwin 1.1 today.
We'll start a build of a standalone
Darwin system after the conference,
so in a week or two you should
expect to see a 1.1 download
available from the web.
Kernel updates, as I said,
aren't immediate.
So we have to synchronize the
kernel every so often into Darwin.
We did a sync just last
week of the 1.1 source base.
And we'll start doing
those more regularly.
It took about a month to do that
first one and that's on the long end
of how often we want to do updates.
We're shooting to do them
more on the order of a week.
and hopefully even more often
if we can get away with it.
I'd like to mention that
Darwin is a cross-platform OS.
It was a... of course we're on a PowerPC,
that's what we base Mac OS X on.
And OpenStep,
which is where we got a lot of our code,
ran on a whole bunch of platforms.
It ran on 68k Next Hardware,
it ran on Intel, it ran on Spark,
it ran on HPPA.
The Intel code is all still in there.
One of the things we'd like to see is
to see Intel brought up and deployed
and installable in an easy way so that
people can actually develop on that
and thereby grow our developer base.
Additional platforms are
certainly a possibility.
We'd probably like to see
two before we take on twelve.
We've had queries about Alpha and
Intel's new stuff and whatnot.
So that's certainly all available.
Currently, when you install Darwin,
you need to wipe a disk.
and many more.
I think we're going to start all over.
It's suboptimal.
One thing we're shooting for is to
use this depackage tool which comes
from the Debian Linux community.
That allows us to upgrade
individual components of the
operating system one by one.
It's a clever thing because
when you update one tool,
it might know that you also need
a version of something else.
If you update Emacs,
the system framework has to
match the same version that
Emacs was built against,
otherwise it doesn't run.
When you update Emacs,
it will also update the system framework.
These tools are still underway.
They're partly built into Darwin now,
but we need to do a lot of cleanup
and get them working so that
eventually you'll be able to update
between 1.1 and 1.2 and so on without
having to reinstall the whole OS.
In fact, it should be as simple as say,
"Go get me the latest version of
Emacs." It should go out on the net,
fetch it, download it, install it.
"Oh, you need also this other stuff.
Get that, download it,
install it as well."
System installation should be improved.
improved greatly by
using tools like this.
Stan Shebs, who's our GCC guy,
isn't in town today so
I'm covering for him.
In DP3, GCC was version 2.7,
we had a version of
EGCS in there as well,
and the combination of
the two was the compiler.
In DP4, we've got a later version, 2.95,
and in both cases we've got a whole
bunch of Apple hacks that are in there.
Those are pretty extensive.
There's a whole bunch of
Objective-C support that
dates back to the next days.
There's the Mako runtime support.
There's support for
PowerPC and Objective-C++,
and of course the new Velocity
Engine work that we're doing.
Going forward,
one of our big goals is to get
all of that stuff synchronized
with the code that the FSF has.
One problem that we have is when we
update GCC from one version to the next,
it takes an enormous amount of work
to reintegrate all of the patches
that we've been doing every time.
So it takes a long time for
us to update the compiler.
It's a lot of work.
And so we can't really do it every
time a new version of GCC comes out.
So if we manage to get most
of the diffs back upstream,
then we don't have to do
all that work every time.
And so we're working now with the
FSF to assign them copyright to the
parts and do all the right stuff
so that we don't have to keep doing
this work over and over again.
Of course, we're working on improving the
object output so that it's faster,
as well as increasing the
performance of the compiler itself.
We have a technology for
doing pre-compiled headers,
which is something that's being
talked about in the GNU community.
And we actually have something
that's a little stronger than
what they've been discussing.
So one thing is to work with
them and see if what we have is
appropriate for them to take.
We'd like to synchronize a little
better with the GNU C++ ABI,
just so that life is a lot easier.
Objective C++ is sort
of a hot issue lately.
We're probably going to retire that.
The number of clients we
have for it is very small.
Supportive for it is very
complicated and involved.
And it's just getting older and
cruftier and harder to maintain.
It's just not really working out.
So that's probably going to go away.
An interesting project is to consider
merging or somehow reconciling
the Objective C runtimes between
the GNU one and the next one.
They forked a long time ago and they're
not really compatible at this point.
So it would be nice if output
from one compiler worked with the
output from the other compiler.
And of course,
we'd like to update to GCC3
as that becomes available.
So with that, I'd like to invite Dave up
so we can do some demo stuff.
The demos are cool.
[Transcript missing]
It's a standard console,
not the best GUI you'll ever see.
In fact, it's the worst.
We get the standard host of Unix tools.
And as you'll see,
This is... That's rather
interesting there,
Dave.
Yeah.
And that says i386, doesn't it?
Yeah, it does.
Huh.
That's weird.
Maybe we should reboot.
It must have been a bug.
Yeah.
That's a virtual PC on Darwin.
So as you can see,
we're running on Intel.
So this is a pretty
recent milestone for us.
We've got an Intel machine back here,
and you can come back and look after
the talk if you don't believe us.
But we've got the whole
system stack running there.
That's the kernel working.
That's rooted on HFS, isn't it?
No, this is on UFS, actually.
It's on UFS.
Oh, well.
We're close.
But there you go.
The whole thing on Intel,
and it's pretty sexy.
But not an impressive demo,
so we're going to go to something else,
which is a little more interesting.
I'm happy to say that last week I thought
X would be an interesting demo to see,
so I started with
CarMax port of X11 to AppKit,
and I ported it to I/O Kit,
which was pretty quick and pretty easy,
and we have the whole environment here.
So it'd be nice to see some
other things running here.
This version of X looks rather '80s-ish.
It dates itself.
But it works.
We hope to make the changes available
so people can start playing with it.
So this is pretty significant
because we're going,
we had an export that John did
which ran on using the Interceptor
API in Mac OS X server.
And this is actually now talking
natively to the I/O Kit in Mac OS X.
So this is running without any help from
the graphic system that's in Mac OS X.
And one nice thing to do after
this of course would be to get it
to work with the graphic system
in Mac OS X so that you could
co-locate X apps with Mac OS X apps.
And that will help people with
their porting work from Unix
to OS X and so on and so forth.
Which is not to say that
Apple will support X11.
But it will help people with porting.
So that's cool.
Thank you Dave.
Thanks for you guys to think about.
Hopefully.
Now that Darwin 1.0 is out,
there's a lot of opportunities
for people to work on stuff.
Device drivers is sort of a great
thing for people to work on,
especially on the Intel platform
where we actually have very few
supported Intel configurations.
We've got kind of like APC that works,
but there's a whole bunch of
hardware out there in the Intel space
that we don't have support for.
And similarly,
back in the days to support
older Macintosh platforms,
we'll also need some additional
driver support and platform support.
NetInfo is our directory service in
Mac OS X and it's part of Darwin.
And one nice thing about that is that
it can be ported to other platforms,
which means that once you've got that,
then you can have a distributed
directory service that works in a
heterogeneous network so that you can
administer them from a central place
and everybody's got the same user
accounts and configuration information.
We'd like support for
various file systems.
There's work underway for Arla and Sara,
who's not here today.
and many more.
We're also working on
supporting Mac OS X.
X11 is something we'd like
to see more work done.
This demo is cool,
but there's a lot more that can
be done to support more toolkits.
Also OpenSSH,
which is a secure communications tool,
which is actually pretty
important to us because we use
it to access the CBS repository.
That's a good one because it has
a free license and we like it.
So there's a whole bunch
of things you can do.
Of course,
this list is by no means exhaustive.
If you're interested in getting involved,
please get on the mailing list,
please start talking to us and let
us know what you're thinking about.
Sessions that you might
be interested in going to.
There's a Darwin overview across
the hall after this session.
There's an I/O Kit overview tomorrow,
and there's networking also tomorrow.
Of course,
these are all components of Darwin,
so they're all interesting.
And the file systems talk is Wednesday,
which is Clark's talk.
Don't miss that.
Birds of a Feather session is Wednesday,
so we can all get together, hang out,
and do some sort of free-form discussion
where it's not just me spewing up here.
Kernel Talk Thursday,
Feedback Forum Friday,
and I'm doing a talk on
BSD support in Mac OS X,
which is sort of a general OS overview
for the Darwin side of things,
Friday at 3:30.
So with that,
I'd like to hand off to Chris,
who's going to talk about
the Streaming Server.
Thanks, Fred.
So I'm going to talk real briefly
about what we've been doing with the
streaming server for the last year.
So, starting with last year,
we came out with the initial release
of Darwin Streaming Server on Mac OS X.
And that was pretty big news.
It was the first open source,
totally open standard,
free streaming server on the planet.
And a year later, it still is.
With 1.02 we announced a re-added
support for Linux and FreeBSD.
And soon followed that with a 2.0
release that added support for Solaris.
And last month we
announced support for NT,
which should be ready
in just a few weeks.
We're still kind of cleaning
that up a little bit.
So another thing we did with the
2.0 release is we added a plugin
architecture to the server.
And we realized early on that
developers were going to want
to be able to extend the server,
and we figured that if we just
left them with Open Source,
they would hack the server up and it
would be a miserable mess for everybody,
so we added a plugin architecture.
And two of the goals of that
architecture were that it be easy to
use and that it be high performance.
So with that in mind,
we decided to eat our own dog food,
and we re-implemented nearly all of
the functions in the server as plugins.
So like the video on demand support,
the live streaming support, the logging,
the authentication,
all that stuff is done as plugins.
So that's definitely the preferred way
to do any enhancements to the server.
And if you want to check
out the documentation,
it's part of the source code downloader.
You can either download
or get into the CVS tree.
Another thing that happened is the
server became extremely popular.
Some of the biggest names in internet
content hosting picked up the server.
Digital Island, for example,
has announced that they're going to
deploy the server on 6,000 SunBoxes.
Akamai has been running Linux versions
of the server for over a year now.
So Akamai, if you're not aware,
they host all of Apple's
QuickTime TV content.
Interview, they do hosting for
CNN's streaming content,
and they've had the server
running on Linux boxes as well.
And then iBeam just recently
has begun deployment across
their network on NT machines.
So there's a pretty good reason for
why these guys are all deploying,
because there's a huge
amount of demand out there.
So in the last year we've
had over 36 million downloads
of the QuickTime 4 client.
And on top of that,
every month over 200 CD-ROM titles
ship that contain the QuickTime 4.
So there are a lot of reasons
for supporting QuickTime.
So, get back to the plugins.
So with that size of installed base,
there's obviously a bunch of
money to be made out there.
And the plugin API provides
that opportunity.
It allows you to create value-add
products on top of the streaming server.
Some examples might be a turnkey solution
for internet streaming on the radio.
Radio streaming.
Internet streaming for radio stations.
Another one may be like a
full-featured ISP solution that
contains back-end database support,
account management, bandwidth,
and disk quotas, and things like that.
Those are things that we're probably
not going to do in the near future.
So there's a huge opportunity
to take care of those things,
or to develop those as your
own products and sell them.
One thing I should mention is that,
so plugins are a little bit different.
They don't fall under the APSL,
Apple's Public Source License.
And what I mean by that is that
Apple Public Source License requires that
if you modify any Darwin source code,
that you need to post that back to Apple,
and then we'll eventually
post that back to the world.
Plugins don't start out
as Darwin source code.
They start out as your own source code,
and they just happen to
call an API that's in the
Darwin streaming server.
So they remain proprietary.
You can keep your competitive advantages,
and you can actually create
your own products that way.
And we really want to promote people
starting with the Darwin streaming
server and creating your own products,
branding it as your own product,
and selling it as your own product,
and making a bunch of money,
and helping to propagate QuickTime.
propagate quick time.
So a couple of the things we've
got planned for the future.
We're going to add a pluggable file
system layer to the module API.
And by that,
what I mean is you'll be able
to write a module that will
effectively replace the file system
as far as the server is concerned.
So an example of that may be that you
want to write something that treats some
high-speed database as the file system.
You drop that into the server,
and all of a sudden,
the server and all the modules that
make file calls will retrieve all
of their movies and information and
any other file out of that database.
Maybe you've got a distributed
network file system you
want to get it to work with,
that kind of thing.
So that's the first thing.
The second thing is we plan
to do a web-based admin for
all of the Darwin platforms.
Currently,
the only GUI that we have is on
Mac OS X server and it's an application
that runs in the yellow box of Mac.
[Transcript missing]
The next step is to add functionality
or create your products under
the Darwin Streaming Server.
You should be able to drop that
stuff right in and it'll just
mix in as a part of the UI for
and other developers.
Thank you for your time.
Let us know.
The best way to contact us is
through the Darwin Streaming
Server developer mailing list.
You can go to lists.apple.com
and sign up on that.
And for any other information
about the streaming server,
just go to www.apple.com/darwin.
A couple of sessions before I go
that you might want to check
out are the QuickTime Streaming
Web Techniques session,
which will be tomorrow
at 3:00 in the Civic.
And at 4:30 in the Civic,
there will be a session on how to
write streaming server modules.
In fact,
I think the engineer doing that session
is probably going to write a module right
up on stage just to show how easy it is.
Also,
we'll have streaming server engineers
at the QuickTime Feedback Forum and
at the Darwin Birds and Feathers,
so if you want to stop by and
say hi or ask us any questions
or provide your feedback,
we'd be happy to talk to you.
And that's all I've got to say,
and I'd like to pass off to Joe.
Thank you very much.
Randy is setting up an interesting
demo for when we finish up here.
For those of you that don't know,
OpenPlay and NetSprocket are the
Open Source networking items.
[Transcript missing]
and we've been making some
good headway with it since.
NetSprocket just became Open Source.
You might be familiar with it out of
the GameSprockets package that Apple's
been supporting for quite some time.
And we got that in December and
when I finish up here,
Randall will show us some pretty
exciting developments in what we've got.
Do you have the screen?
OpenPlay right now is live, active,
ready to go on a CBS repository.
You can download it, compile it,
Mac OS and Windows, it runs right now.
At least one commercial title,
I believe LucasArts shipped a
title using it in December in
time for the Christmas market
and it's gone over quite well.
So it's real, it works, it's effective.
It is cross-platform.
Right now the Linux and
OS X variants are still in the works,
but we've got pretty good
coverage at the moment.
It's protocol agnostic.
It uses a plug-in module design.
which has the advantage of giving
your user the choice of which
protocol they'd like to use.
If you're using a game market,
for example,
very few home users are that adept
at setting up a TCP/IP network,
but they can get
AppleTalk up and running.
Using OpenPlay,
you don't have to worry about
how you're going to support
the lower level protocols.
You let us worry about it
and let the user choose.
So it cuts down your risk,
increases your time to market,
or reduces your time to market.
[Transcript missing]
Which was really nice.
I'll get to it in a bit when
NetSprocket was released.
We'll be able to leverage
some good things.
But basically you have the application,
[Transcript missing]
With NetSprocket,
we had some really nice things
that we wanted to have in OpenPlay,
but we didn't have the
resources at the time to get,
and we were anxious to get it
released into the community.
When we found out it
was possible to do so,
we jumped on it.
It is multi-protocol,
TCP/IP and AppleTalk,
through OpenTransport.
It does some of the
higher level functions,
packet management, player management.
As APIs go,
it's quite simple to work with.
The only disadvantage
was it was Mac only.
There are larger markets out
there that if you could leverage,
you may as well.
Between OpenGL and OpenPlay,
those two right there can cover
most needs of many applications.
Why not expand your market essentially
for free or as close as you can get?
So what we've been doing,
Randy in particular has been busting
butt and he now has NetSprocket
sitting on top of OpenPlay.
So we basically got the best
of all worlds at the moment.
We have, if you want to use it,
the higher level functionality of
NetSprocket sitting on top of the
cross-platform nature of OpenPlay.
I have a working demo
in about a minute here.
The reason it's exciting
to have this out there is,
again,
The cross-platform development
between NetSprocket,
OpenPlay, OpenGL, and other technologies,
there's really no reason not
to target multiple platforms.
It's better for the Mac environment,
it's better for everybody.
The developer community has
been very good at supporting us.
More names than we can
mention at this point.
If you want to sign up and join us,
we're ready to roll right now.
We've got a lot of changes coming up.
We've got a critical mass momentum.
We'll be finishing up
Linux shortly and then Mac OS X.
And from there, anything we want.
So as it stands now,
you can either write with your
application straight into OpenPlay if
you don't choose to use the higher
level functions or use NetSprocket.
The one problem OpenPlay has is its name.
It's not necessarily just a gaming API.
We've got people interested
in medical imaging that would
like to use it and plan to.
Because really it's just sending
bytes using a single API,
again cross platform.
Advantages for a lot of people.
and with that, Randy Thompson,
agent of Freeverse Software,
would like to show off the
wares he's been working on.
Things don't blow up,
but it shows things working and
I happen to think it's kind of fun.
Button three.
Play a game, Joe.
I'll let you know when to hit
any menus or buttons or anything.
Gonna play some cribbage.
This is a game that I released
with Freeverse Software.
Say thank you Ian, wherever you are.
Oh, around the November time frame.
Let's just go ahead and do the
NetSprocket OpenPlay demo host game.
and there I am,
Randy T., waiting for other players.
So now Joe, if you'll hit Demo Join Game.
And there's Joe.
So why don't you just
click on the screen once.
and we're shuffling the
cards and ready to go.
You can also chat.
Joe could too if he wanted to.
and Joe Gervais.
So without real,
let's just hit two cards at random there,
Joe.
Uh, yeah.
And now it's your turn,
just go ahead and hit a card.
You can see that we're
really playing here,
Joe and I.
I really wish we had time to play
an entire game here in this demo
because I think I could kick his butt.
But it doesn't look like
that's going to be possible,
so I'm going to choose a restart game.
and Joe LeFranco,
and we're back in a mode where
we can accept new players.
Okay Joe, you're free to go now.
Let me tell you a little
bit about what I did here.
Classic Cribbage was released
last November and originally
it used NetSprocket 1.7.
A few months ago I downloaded the
OpenPlay and the NetSprocket source and
I started to work replacing the open
transport calls inside of NetSprocket.
There were plenty of them.
I pulled them out one by one
and replaced them with their
equivalent OpenPlay calls.
In some cases there weren't
equivalents so I had to get a little
bit fancy and tricky and hopefully
I don't have too many bugs.
But now we basically have a new
NetSprocket that sits on top of
OpenPlay as the diagram showed.
Look, Mr.
PC just joined.
I guess he was there for a little while.
Joe, why don't you ask me a question?
Ask me how these folks can be
sure that this cribbage isn't
just using NetSprocket 1.7.
Randy, how can they be sure we didn't
can it just for the demo?
That's a pretty silly question.
How you can be sure is Mr.
PC here is actually an
OpenPlay application that's running under
Virtual PC on this laptop right here,
right now.
So it's actually a Win32 application
running on Virtual PC that
just connected with this game.
Unfortunately,
due to technical difficulties,
we couldn't get a video feed
on this old laptop here,
so you'll just have to trust me.
If you don't want to trust me,
you're welcome to show up on
Wednesday at Birds of Feather and
you'll be able to see a lot of this.
We'll have a lot more time, I understand,
to do things like that.
So that's pretty much the demo.
I think we have one more slide.
Switch over to one.
Thank you very much Randy.
So as you can see it's real,
it's in the real world, it's running,
companies are using it.
It's a good thing.
If you can get to the birds of a feather,
I'd strongly encourage it.
Obviously, we're no better than
our group of developers,
which is all of you.
So the more people that can contribute,
the further we can get along.
And again, it's not just games,
it's networking in general.
And maybe use it to roll into
your own web company and start an
IPO before the market dries up.
Please make it if you can.
With that,
I'll pass it over to Ron Hayden who
will be doing the session on HedrDoc.
So you saw earlier there are 80,000
hits on Darwin and 600 on HedrDoc.
So one of my jobs,
aside from getting people to contribute,
is to get people using it.
Frequently,
as important as the source code in any
Open Source project is the documentation.
And we're very serious about
documentation in Darwin.
So we're starting on a program of
making sure the documentation is
as close to the source as possible.
And the first project for that is
HedrDoc for reference documentation.
Now why would you want to use HedrDoc?
Well,
you can go to an Open Source project
not using a tool like HedrDoc
and get bad documentation.
Or you can go to a Darwin project using
HedrDoc and get great documentation.
What you get from it, with no extra work,
is, in this case we have one
of our I/O Kit classes.
All of our I/O Kit reference
documentation is done using HedrDoc
and accessible in the source.
We take the I/O Kit class,
we break it down into its introduction,
its public functions, its protection,
its data types, etc.
Give excellent formatting of
parameters and everything else.
For all the work that you have to
do is stick in some tags like this.
So we support C and C++.
We stay as close as we
can to Java doc style,
but we have to vary from it because
these are different languages
and this is a different tool.
And you use that and you
get the output that you saw.
[Transcript missing]
Also, we find one of the main requests
we have from internal developers
as well as external is they want
the API grouped and ordered.
So if you have display functions,
you want all those display
functions together,
and you want the most
commonly used ones at the top,
etc.
So we would love to get some
assistance in making that happen.
Finally, and this is already started
thanks to Lewis Gerberg,
we would like to be outputting XML.
Right now we go directly to HTML,
but it would be great to go to
XML because then you can choose
what format to go to from there,
you can go into a database,
we can do lots of cool stuff.
So we have some work on that started,
but there's a lot to do for that and it
would be great to get some assistance.
But the number one thing anyone can do
is just start using it on your project.
We would just love to have everyone
using this on all of the Darwin projects
because that is really going to
make this thing take off and it
will be really good for everyone.
and yes,
we have Birds of a Feather in room
E at the same time as everyone else.
So,
I think a couple of important messages
we want to leave you with here.
Apple is very committed to Open Source.
We have a lot of technologies and
things we shared with you today.
We have some external partners
who we've been working with.
We'd like you to join with us in
working on our Open Source technologies.
For these technologies,
the source is live in CVS,
so if you want to find
out what we're doing,
this is the best way to do it.
Download the source code,
get in there and get involved.
I'm going to stress again,
and you'll hear this a few
times through the week,
that Darwin,
our OS part of our Open Source project,
is exactly the same source code
as the Core OS for Mac OS X.
If you are involved in Mac OS X,
which you all should be,
and want to know as much as
you can about what's going on,
get involved with Darwin, contribute,
help learn, get in the right drivers.
There's a lot of cool
technology in there,
and that's the place to start.
Also, help get involved with the
support infrastructure.
We've got a lot of cool stuff
that we've released recently,
certainly the CVS stuff.
There's bug reporting,
there's our mailing list,
all of these things,
our Darwin developers.
These are all resources you should start
working with and start contributing to.
This only works if you're involved.
It's the whole goal of Open Source.
It'd be great if we just, you know,
just made this,
posted it up on a wall somewhere,
but the real key is,
is that in order to make this really
powerful is to get you involved.
So, you know, you've got a lot of great
ideas as you're working,
importing your projects, as you're,
you know, developing cool new technology,
you know,
this is a place to have an impact
on the future of Apple directly.
So get involved.
Also check out the to-do list we have
on the website and in the mailing list.
One of the things that we're
trying to do in case you're not
really sure how to get started,
you want to get involved
in this Open Source stuff,
it sounds really cool,
but don't know what to get involved
with first or how to get your feet wet,
we've got some to-do lists
that give you some ideas.
If you've got your own, that's great.
But if you're looking for ways
that you can help contribute and
help make the environment better,
come check out the website.
and definitely join us at the Birds of
a Feather sessions on Wednesday.
There's a great opportunity for a
lot of one-on-one communication.
We'd love to hear from you and your
ideas and ways that we can improve this.
As I said early on in the presentation,
you know, this is pretty new, you know,
a new approach for the community
at large and certainly for Apple.
And we're learning and are very open
to any ideas that you might have.